Not so long ago, anyone who had heard the word "algorithm" was almost certainly a computer scientist or mathematician. With computers having become prevalent in our modern lives, however, the term is no longer esoteric. If you look around your home, you'll find algorithms running in the most mundane places: your microwave oven, your washing machine, and, of course, your computer. You ask algorithms to make recommendations to you: what music you might like or what rooute to take when driving. Our society, for better or for worse, asks algorithms to suggest sentences for convicted criminals. You even rely on algorithms to key you alive, or at least not to kill you: the control systems in your car or in medical equipment.
The word "algorithm" appears somewhere in the news seemingly every day.
  Therefore, it behooves you to understand algorithms not just as a student or practitioner of computer science, but as a citizen of the world. Once you understand algorithms, you can educate others about what algorithms are, how they operate, and what their limitations are.
  This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of computer algorithms. It presents many algorithms and covers them in considerable depth, yet makes their design accessible to all levels of readers. All the analyses are laid out, some simple, some more involved. We have tried to keep explanations clear without sacrificing depth of coverage or mathematical rigor.
  Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application area, or a related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a pseudocode designed to be readable by anyone who has done a little programming. The book contains 231 figures - many with multiple parts - illustrating how the algorithms work. Since we emphasize efficiency as a design criterion, we include careful analyses of the running times of the algorithms.
  The text is intended primarily for use in undergraduate or graduate courses in algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses engineering issues in algorithm design, as well as mathematical aspects, it is equally well suited for self-study by technical professionals.
  In this, the fourth edition, we have once again updated the entire book. The changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters and sections, color illustrations, and what we hope you'll find to be a more engaging writing style.
